The accounting models
=====================

Groups
------

Groups are basically bars. It is used for grouping the bars own accounts and
the accounts of the bar's members.

In addition to its name and slug it has several fields:


Placeholder:

If the group is not used by a real-world group (because they are not using
µFS), but just is a placeholder for paying receiving transfers, the placeholder
field is set to True. This is used when creating transactions related to other
groups.


Limits:

warn_limit and block_limit can be used to warn and block accounts if their
balance is below the given limit.


Admins:

This is a many-to-many field, containing the user names of all users with admin
access to the group and all of its accounts.


Typical accounts:

bank_account and cash_account are pointers to two arbitrary accounts held by
the group which works as bank and cash accounts. These are needed to receive
transfers from other groups. Additional typical accounts, like sales_account,
will probably be added in the future.


User Accounts
-------------

- User accounts have an owner (e.g. a real person).
- The name should be the name of the owner or another nickname to be shown
  (e.g. on the krysselist).
- Type is 'Liability' for all user accounts. Liability is credit owed to the
  owner.
- Active is a flag indicating if the owner still is an active member of the
  bar.
- The balance method gives the accounts balance at any time.


Group Accounts
--------------

Ownership:

Group accounts do not have an owner, but belongs to a group. Owner is NULL for
all group accounts.


Typical accounts:

Most groups will at least have the two accounts 'Bank' and 'Cash'. Other
accounts may for example be 'Income', 'Expense', 'Inventory' and 'Result'.


Account types:

All accounts got an account type, examples follow:
- 'Asset': 'Bank', 'Cash', 'Inventory', 'Hyttetur 2007' (debit to increase)
- 'Liability': 'Supplier Debt', person accounts (credit to increase)
- 'Equity': 'Capital' (credit to increase), 'Drawing' (debit to increase)
- 'Income': 'Sales Income', 'Interest Revenues' (credit to increase)
- 'Expense': 'Supplies Expense', 'Interest Expenses' (debit to increase)
See Wikipedia_ for more information on this.

.. _Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Account


Active account:

Active is a flag indicating if the account is still in use. E.g. if a bar
changes it's real world bank account number, one would maybe create a new
account for it and deactivate the old one.


Transactions
------------

General restrictions:

- A transaction may only include accounts belonging to a single group.

  E.g., one can never create transactions with entries for accounts in
  different groups. However, one can create corresponding transactions in two
  groups at the same time.

- All transactions must have positive sums on both the debit and credit side.

- All users can register deposits and withdrawals, but the payed/received date
  will not be set before the group admin has approved the transaction and, if
  necessary, transfered the money in the real world.

  E.g. a user can request a withdrawal by registering it himself. Then the
  group admin will transfer the money in the real world bank system, and
  approve the µFS transaction (that is, set the status to 'payed').


Deposits:

If the credit entry is a person's account and the debit entry is the bank
account of the group the user account belongs to, it is a deposit from the
person to the person's account.

This gives that a negative amount on a liability account means that the person
has money to spend. A positive amount means that the person owes the bar money.


Withdrawals:

If the credit entry is a bar's bank account and the debit entry is a person's
account, it is a withdrawal from the person's account to the person.

Typically a user registers a transactions of this kind when he wants to
withdraw money, then a group admin transfers the real-world money and completes
the transaction in µFS by setting the transaction's status to 'received' to
signal that the debtor has received the money.


Transaction between user accounts:

All users can transfer money to all other users within the same group. The
group admin does not have to approve the transaction.


Registering sales:

When a person buys anything from his own bar the corresponding sum will be
registered as a transaction debiting the person's account and crediting the
group's sale account.


Claiming expenses:

When a person has bought anything in the real-world for the bar, the
corresponding sum will be registered as a transaction crediting the person's
account and debiting the group's expenses account.


Settlements (aka 'BSF')
-----------------------

When people buy stuff at other bars, they build up debt between the bars. This
debt is settled in 'settlements' also known as 'BSF'.


Example:

The admin of group B creates an invoice for group A listing what each person in
group A owes group B. The admin of group A then registers the amount to debit
each user in group A and transfers the total to group B. Transactions-wise this
is done in two-by-two steps:

Upon creation of an invoice by group B,

1. in group B, a transaction with an income account, e.g. 'Sales' at the debit
   side, and an asset account, e.g. 'Owed by Group A' on the credit side.
2. in group A, a transaction with one or more user accounts of group A on the
   debit side, and a liability account, e.g. 'Debt to Group B' at the credit
   side.

Upon payment of an invoice by group A,

3. in group A, a transaction with an asset account, e.g. 'Bank' or 'Cash', at
   the credit side, and the liability account from step one on the debit side.
   When all debts are payed, all the non-user-liability accounts should have a
   balance of zero.
4. in group B, a transaction with an asset account, e.g. 'Sold to Group A', at
   the credit side, and an income account, e.g. 'Income', at the debit side.


Workflow optimization:

To optimize the workflow, the transaction in step two can be registered
(status: registered) when group B creates the transaction in step one, and the
transaction in step four can be registered (status: payed) when group A creates
the transaction in step three.

The group admin of the other group must in each case approve the transaction in
his own group, either when he accepts the invoice in step two (if not,
real-world communication is needed) or when he has received payment of an
invoice in step four (if not, real-world communication is needed).


Workflow optimization pros:

The admin in step two does not have to enter all the people owing group B
money, while the admin in step four is alerted that group A has transfered
money in the real-world, and may then check if he has received them. This
reduces the need for pull-checking the real-world bank for new incoming
payments.


:Authors: Stein Magnus Jodal, Thomas Adamcik
:Version: 2007-12-16-1
